EXCERPTS FROM "GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL" BY JARED DIAMOND

ON HUMAN HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY:
History followed different courses for different peoples because of differences among peoples' environments, not because of biological differences among peoples themselves. The striking differences between the long-term histories of peoples of the different continents have been due not to innate differences in the peoples themselves but to differences in their environments.

ON AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT:
Food production was indirectly a prerequisite for the development of guns, germs, and steel. Hence geographic variation in whether, or when, the peoples of different continents became farmers and herders explains to a large extent their subsequent contrasting fates.

ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANTAGE:
In short, Europe's colonization of Africa had nothing to do with differences between European and African peoples themselves, as white racists assume. Rather, it was due to accidents of geography and biogeography—in particular, to the continents' different areas, axes, and suites of wild plant and animal species. That is, the different historical trajectories of Africa and Europe stem ultimately from differences in real estate.

ON SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT:
Beyond guns and steel, the strangers' other advantages included their political organization, writing, and maritime technology. These advantages were proximate causes, but what were the ultimate factors that led to the development of those proximate advantages among Eurasians but not among Native Americans?

ON DISEASE AND CONQUEST:
The main killers were Old World germs to which Indians had never been exposed, and against which they therefore had neither immune nor genetic resistance. Smallpox, measles, influenza, and typhus competed for top rank among the killers.

ON ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINISM:
My two main conclusions are that technology develops cumulatively, rather than in isolated heroic acts, and that it finds most of its uses after it has been invented, rather than being invented to meet a foreseen need.

ON CULTURAL EVOLUTION:
In short, human cultural traits vary greatly around the world. But the variation is far from random. It is a function of local environmental conditions, such as the conditions that led to agriculture's rise in the Fertile Crescent.

ON HISTORICAL CONTINGENCY:
We tend to seek easy, single-factor explanations of success. For most important things, though, success actually requires avoiding many separate possible causes of failure.

ON GEOGRAPHICAL ADVANTAGES:
Eurasia's dense populations, high local diversity, and east-west axis of trade provided it with many societies competing with one another, experimenting with innovations, and learning from each other's successes and failures. Major advances could then sweep rapidly from one society to others on the same continent.

ON LONG-TERM HISTORICAL PATTERNS:
The history of interactions among disparate peoples is what shaped the modern world through conquest, epidemics, and genocide. Those collisions created reverberations that have still not died down after many centuries, and that are actively continuing in some of the world's most troubled areas today. 
 