EXCERPTS FROM "SAPIENS" BY YUVAL NOAH HARARI

ON HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS AND STORYTELLING:
Ever since the Cognitive Revolution, Sapiens have thus been living in a dual reality. On the one hand, the objective reality of rivers, trees and lions; and on the other hand, the imagined reality of gods, nations and corporations. As time went by, the imagined reality became ever more powerful, so that today the very survival of rivers, trees and lions depends on the grace of imagined entities such as the United States and Google.

ON SHARED MYTHS:
The real difference between us and chimpanzees is the mythical glue that binds together large numbers of individuals, families and groups. This glue has made us the masters of creation.

ON HUMAN HISTORY AND IDEOLOGIES:
History has witnessed few cases in which human rights or social equality were extended to other animals. Indeed, human history can be seen as a process of increasing separation between humans and other animals.

ON MEANING AND PURPOSE:
As far as we can tell from a purely scientific viewpoint, human life has absolutely no meaning. Humans are the outcome of blind evolutionary processes that operate without goal or purpose... Any meaning that people inscribe to their lives is just a delusion.

ON HAPPINESS AND TECHNOLOGY:
Humans easily get habituated to new luxuries, so they are soon taken for granted. The right to have a car or washing machine now feels as natural as the right to have clothes. The opposite is true of collective structures such as the welfare state. People quickly get used to them too, but governments everywhere claim that these are too expensive, and societies must learn to live without them. Yet it's easy to see that the welfare state does far more to make people happy than a new car or fancy smartphone.

ON THE FUTURE OF HUMANITY:
Three important revolutions shaped the course of history: the Cognitive Revolution kick-started history about 70,000 years ago. The Agricultural Revolution sped it up about 12,000 years ago. The Scientific Revolution, which got under way only 500 years ago, may well end history and start something completely different.

ON KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE:
The Scientific Revolution has not been a revolution of knowledge. It has been above all a revolution of ignorance. The great discovery that launched the Scientific Revolution was the discovery that humans do not know the answers to their most important questions.

ON INDIVIDUALISM:
The supreme commandment of the rich is 'Invest!' The supreme commandment of the rest of us is 'Buy!' The capitalist-consumerist ethic is revolutionary in another respect. Most previous ethical systems presented people with a pretty tough deal. They were promised paradise, but only if they cultivated compassion and tolerance, overcome craving and anger, and restrained their selfish interests. This was too tough for most. The history of ethics is a sad tale of wonderful ideals that nobody can live up to.

ON TRUTH AND POWER:
We study history not to know the future but to widen our horizons, to understand that our present situation is neither natural nor inevitable, and that we consequently have many more possibilities before us than we imagine. 
 